\documentclass[12pt]{article}
\usepackage{amsfonts, epsfig}
\usepackage[authoryear]{natbib}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{fancyhdr}
\pagestyle{fancy}
\lfoot{\texttt{comsm0034.github.io}}
\lhead{IP\&B - 2\_information\_in\_the\_brain - Conor}
\rhead{\thepage}
\cfoot{}
\begin{document}

\section*{Information in the brain} 

We will look at two applications of information theory to the study of
the brain; the first, dealt with here is calculating the information
content of spike trains. This is a example of data analysis for
interpreting experimental data in neuroscience. The second, infomax,
is an interpretation of information processing in the brain, which may
have something to tell us about how to compute with data; this will be
in the next chapter.

\subsection*{The information content of spike trains}

Neurons communicate using action potentials, discrete voltage spikes
that travel from neuron to neuron. This is the main way information
propagates through the brain. The action potentials, often also called
spikes, a stereotypical in amplitude, so the information that carry is
represented in their timing. Spike trains are very noisy, repeated
responses to the same stimulus tend to be very different; for example,
in Fig.~\ref{fig_zebra_finch} there are raster plots from neurons in
the auditory area of the zebra finch brain; a raster plot is a plot
with a little dash for each spike. The individual trials run
horizontally. As you can see there is considerable variation from
trial to trial. This variability is unsurprising, the brain is made up
of multiple interlocking ad hoc networks so there is likely to be
considerable background noise. The question is then, how much
information do spike trains carry.

\begin{figure}[htb]
\begin{center}
\include{raster}
\end{center}
\caption{The response of cells in the auditory fore brain of zebra
  finch to a conspecific song stimulus. \textbf{A} shows the sonogram
  for the song; \textbf{B}, \textbf{C} and \textbf{D} show rasterplots
  for three responses, each one second long. For each cell there are
  ten trials, stacked vertically, with each horizonal line
  corresponding to a single trial. Each small dash is a single
  spike.\label{fig_zebra_finch}}
\end{figure}

An attempt to answer this question is found in
\cite{StrongEtAl1998}. They consider the response of the large
movement sensitive \lq{}H1\rq{} neurons at the back of the brain of
blowfly. They recorded from these neurons for some time while the fly
was shown a moving stimulus. They then discretized the spike trains,
binning them into small time bins, as in
Fig.~\ref{fig_discretization}. If the time bins are chosen small
enough, this is a sequence of zeros and ones. The sequence of zeros
and ones can then be split into a sequence of words
\begin{equation}
010001000000100\rightarrow 01000,10000,00100
\end{equation}

\newpage
There words can be considered a set of outcomes for a random variable:
\begin{eqnarray}
\textbf{w}_0&=&(0,0,0,0,0)\cr
\textbf{w}_1&=&(0,0,0,0,1)\cr
\textbf{w}_2&=&(0,0,0,1,0)\cr
\textbf{w}_3&=&(0,0,0,1,1)\cr
&&\ldots
\end{eqnarray}

\begin{figure}[htb]
\begin{center}
\include{discretization}
\end{center}
\caption{Discretization: the spike train is changed into a series of
  zeros and ones by binning then using a small time
  step.\label{fig_discretization}}
\end{figure}

Now the idea is to calculate the mutual input between the
$\textbf{w}_i$s and the stimulus. To this end they recorded two cases,
in the first they varied the input for some time, allowing them to
calculate $H(W)$; in the second they repeated the same stimulus
sequence many times, allowing them to calculate $H(W|S)$; $S$
represents the stimulus. In practice this means that they played the
same movement sequence many times. This movement sequence is split up
into 30 ms sections, each section counts as one stimulus, say $s$
represents on of these stimuli. It is possible to calculate
$p_{S|W}(W|S=s)$ by counting the occurance of each word during the
repititions of $s$. From this $H(W|S=s)$ is calculated. Now, under the
assumption that each stimulus is equally likely, this is averaged over
the stimuli to give $H(W|S)$. A similar procedure using the
non-repeating stimulus give $H(W)$ and from the difference comes
$I(W;S)$.

One question is how to decide how small to make the discretization
time and how long to make the words. It is argued that the blowfly
responds very quickly to attempts to swat it, so the information
coming from H1 is being interpreted by other brain areas over a time
scale of 30 ms. The discretization size is $\delta t=3$ ms. In
\cite{StrongEtAl1998} they report $78\pm 5$ bits per second, which,
given the firing rate, equates to $1.8\pm 0.1$ bits per
spike. 

Obviously one interesting question is how the mutual information
varies with $\delta t$, the discretization size; if it increases as
$\delta t$ decreases, this indicates timings carry information at
smaller time scales. The problem is that the smaller $\delta t$, the
more words there are; with $\delta t=1$ ms there are $2^{30}$, about a
billion different words. Another approach is to preturb the spike
train, for example by jittering the spike times. Looking at how this
changes the mutual information tells us how information is coded in
the spike trains.

The difficulty with this approach to the information content of spike
trains is the huge number of words: with 30 ms words and 3 ms letters
there are $2^{10}=1024$ words. If six seconds of data are used for the
repeating stimulus, that is 100 different stimuli, then even for a
three hour recording there are 1800 trails for each stimulus, not a
huge amount for estimating 1024 probabilities. Thus means that it
would take a lot of data to reliably estimate the probabilities needed
to calculate the mutual information. Of course, in the case of blowfly
considerable amounts of data are available and the quick reaction time
also makes the restriction to 30 ms words reasonable, but the size of
data set does present a challenge. There are clever ways to improve
this situation; already in \cite{StrongEtAl1998} they look at how the
estimate varies with the amount of data and then extrapolate. In
\cite{NemenmanEtAl2004} the estimation of probability from counting is
improved in a way that improves the estimate for mutual information. I
also look at this problem in \cite{Houghton2015,Houghton2018}

\bibliographystyle{apa}
\bibliography{../../source/bibliography}{}


\end{document}

